Add MPI-enabled version of NEST Server and NEST Server documentation (#2022)
nest/nest-simulator: doc/userdoc/nest_server.rst

Reset the NEST simulation kernel (no response)::

  requests.get('http://localhost:5000/api/ResetKernel').json()

Sending an API request in JSON format::

  requests.post('http://localhost:5000/api/GetDefaults', json={'model': 'iaf_psc_alpha'}).json()

Create neurons in NEST and return a list of IDs for the new nodes::

  neurons = requests.post('http://localhost:5000/api/Create', json={"model": "iaf_psc_alpha", "n": 100}).json()
  print(neurons)

.. _nest_server_security:

Security considerations
-----------------------

As explained above, the ``/exec`` route of the NEST Server API allows
you to run custom Python scripts within the NEST Server context. This
can greatly simplify your workflow in situations where you already
have the simulation description in form of a Python script. On the
technical side, however, this route obviously exposes a potential risk
for the remote execution of malicious code.

In order to protect the execution environment from such security
breaches, we execute all user supplied code in a `RestrictedPython
<https://restrictedpython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ trusted
environment. The most practical consequence of this is that your

> scripts are not permitted to import additional Python modules, unless

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your scripts from importing additional Python modules, unless
```
Attempting here to simplify the language and avoid using 'not'.

NEST Server
===========

.. contents:: On this page, you'll find
   :local:
   :depth: 1

What is NEST Server?
--------------------

NEST Server enables users to interact with the NEST simulation engine
via a RESTful API. Using this approach, you can perform the same basic
operations as with :doc:`PyNEST <ref_material/pynest_apis>`, but
instead of doing so by directly importing the ``nest`` module, all
commands as well as their arguments and result data are channeled

> through HTTP requests and responses transmitted over a TCP/IP

Reviewer: yes I agree, I misinterpreted the sentence. 
How about this:

"Using this approach, you can perform the same basic operations as with :doc:`PyNEST <ref_material/pynest_apis>`, but instead of directly importing the nest module, all commands, including their arguments and result data, are channeled through HTTP requests and responses over a TCP/IP connection."

> through HTTP requests and responses transmitted over a TCP/IP

Author: I like how adding more commas seems to be your generic answer to everything :-)
I also like your new version and have added a suggestion those lines below.

> via a RESTful API. Using this approach, you can perform the same basic
> operations as with :doc:`PyNEST <ref_material/pynest_apis>`, but
> instead of doing so by directly importing the ``nest`` module, all
> commands as well as their arguments and result data are channeled
> through HTTP requests and responses transmitted over a TCP/IP
> connection.

Author: ```suggestion
via a RESTful API. Using this approach, you can perform the same basic
operations as with :doc:`PyNEST <ref_material/pynest_apis>`, but
instead of doing so by directly importing the ``nest`` module, all
commands, including their arguments and result data, are channeled
through HTTP requests and responses transmitted over a TCP/IP
connection.
```

Reviewer: Do you need the word transmitted (line 16)? It reads awkwardly to me, and I think it makes sense without the word.

you a better idea of what NEST Server is good for, here are some of
its main use cases.

One scenario in which NEST Server comes in handy, is if you want to
normally work on your laptop, but run your NEST simulations on a
machine with higher performance or more memory, for instance a big
workstation or computer cluster at your lab. For this, you would
deploy NEST Server on the remote machine and use the provided
:ref:`NEST Server Client <nest_server_client>` locally, or write your
own client using one of the recipes provided in the :ref:`section on
advanced applications <nest_server_advanced>`.

`NEST Desktop <https://nest-desktop.readthedocs.io/>`_, the web-based
graphical user interface for NEST, uses NEST Server as its simulation
backend. It supports server instances running either locally or
remotely. More details about how to configure and run this setup can
be found in the documentation of NEST Desktop.

Last but not least, the latest version of the `HBP Neurorobotic
Platform <https://neurorobotics.net/>`_ use the NEST Server to run the
neuronal simulation as part of closed-loop robotic experiments. As it
has rather specific requirements on the client side, it uses a custom

> NEST Client instead of the generic one shipped with NEST.

Reviewer: I agree

If you yourself have an interesting situation in which you use NEST
Server and would like to have it listed here, feel free to `drop us a
line <https://github.com/nest/nest-simulator/issues>`_.

> Installation and execution

Reviewer: yep, sounds good to me

machine, and Docker images.

For native installations, the requirements can be simply installed via
``pip``::

  pip3 install RestrictedPython uwsgi flask flask-cors

or by installing the full NEST development environment in case you
prefer using ``conda``::

  conda env create -f extras/conda-nest-simulator-dev.yml
  conda acvitate nest-simulator

As an alternative to a native installation, NEST Server is available
from the NEST Docker image. Please check out the corresponding
:ref:`installation instructions <docker_vm_install>` for more details.

Run NEST Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All NEST Server operations are managed using the ``nest-server``
command that can either be run directly::

  nest-server start

or supplied to the execution command line for running the Docker
container::

  docker run -it --rm -e LOCAL_USER_ID=`id -u $USER` -p 5000:5000 nestsim/nest:latest nest-server start

The generic invocation command line for the ``nest-server`` command
looks as follows::

  nest-server <command> [-d] [-o] [-h <host>] [-p <port>] [-u <user>]

Possible commands are `start`, `stop`, `status`, or `log`. The meaning
of the other arguments is as follows:

-d

>     Daemonize the server process

Reviewer: I know this is the correct term, but is it better to say run nest-server in the background?

>     Daemonize the server process

Author: True. It may really be sounding weird to someone not deep into low-level Linux stuff. What about so?
```suggestion
    Run nest-server in the background (i.e. daemonize it)
```

Reviewer: Looks good, just add a comma after i.e. (I see what you mean about the commas).

would normally mean that one NEST Server instance would be spawned for
each rank in a multi-process NEST simulation. To prevent this from
happening, we provide a special version of the NEST Server command for
use with MPI. It can be run as follows::

  mpirun -np N nest-server-mpi [--host HOST] [--port PORT]

If run like this, the RESTful API of the NEST Server will only be
served by the MPI process with rank 0 (called the `master`), while all
other N-1 ranks will start the NEST Server in `worker` mode. Upon
receiving a request, the master relays all commands to the workers,
which execute them, collect all result data, and send it back to the
master. The master then receives and combines all worker responses,
and replies to the caller of the NEST Server API.

The response data in such a distributed scenario looks almost
completely the same as one coming from the serial version of the NEST
Server. The only difference may be that information pertaining to
process-local data structures is being replaced by generic values.

.. _nest_server_client:

The NEST Server Client
----------------------

The easiest way to interact with the NEST Server is the `NEST Server

> Client` provided in ``examples/NESTServerClient`` in the source

Reviewer: Should the `NESTServerClient `be in examples? the directory itself has an examples folder.
Also the file names of the examples could be improved:
`NESTClient_example.py`  and `NESTClient_script.py `

Author: IIRC @babsey originally had it in `extras/` and I voted for moving it to `examples`. As this is actually its own Python package with no dependencies on NEST whatsoever, I'd like to spin it off into its own `pip`-intallable repository mid-term to make it easier for others to build on it.

So in summary, I think we should just leave it as is for now.

distribution of NEST. It can be installed by simply running the

> ``setup.py`` script contained therein. NEST itself does not have to be

Reviewer: So I tried to set up nest-server and when I got to this part I was a bit confused, do I need to run setup.py? If I don't what do I have to do differently? 
Also Is it  better to explicitly show the command `python3 setup.py install`

Author: NEST Server is just there, when you have NEST built and installed. The `setup.py` here is for the NEST Server Client and you're probably right that showing the full command-line would be better.

Presumably it suffices to `cd` to `examples/NESTServerClient`, start `ipython` there and import the client without installation. Maybe I should rather explain it like that and postpone the explanation of the installation until after when the client is in its own repository?

            nsc.Connect(neurons[::10], sr)

            # Simulate
            nsc.Simulate(1000.0)

            # Get events
            n_events = nsc.GetStatus(sr, 'n_events')[0]
            print('Number of events:', n_events)

Executing scripts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The NEST Server Client is able to send complete simulation scripts to
the NEST Server using the functions ``exec_script`` and ``from_file``.
The following listing shows a Python snippet using the NEST Server
Client to execute a simple script on the Server using the
``exec_script`` function:

.. code-block:: Python

    from NESTServerClient import NESTServerClient
    nsc = NESTServerClient()

    response = nsc.exec_script("print('Hello world!')")
    print(response['stdout'])                        # 'Hello world!'

    response = nsc.exec_script("models=nest.Models()", 'models')
    models = response['data']

    print(models)                                    # the list of models

In a more realistic scenario, you probably already have your
simulation script stored in a file. Such scripts can be sent to the
NEST Server for execution using the ``from_file`` function provided by

> the NEST Server Client.

Reviewer: alright I wasn't sure

In order to add additional modules to the execution environment for
the ``/exec`` route, you can add them to the environment variable
``NEST_SERVER_MODULES`` before starting the NEST Server. For instance,
if your script requires NumPy, the command line for starting up the
server would look like this:

.. code-block:: sh

    export NEST_SERVER_MODULES=nest,numpy
    nest-server start

After this, the creation of a NumPy array and returning it as list
would succeed, while it would fail if the environment variable would
not have been set.

.. code-block:: Python

    from NESTServerClient import NESTServerClient
    nsc = NESTServerClient()
    response = nsc.exec_script("a = numpy.arange(10)", 'a')
    print(response['data'][::2])                    # [0, 2, 4, 6, 8]

.. danger::

    We are aware that some code might just not work (well) in a
    RestrictedPython environment. To support such codes, the security
    features of NEST Server can be completely disabled using

    .. code-block:: sh

        export NEST_SERVER_RESTRICTION_OFF=true
        nest-server start

    Please be aware that running NEST Server like this bears a high

>     risk of arbitrary remote code execution and this mode of operation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    risk of arbitrary remote code execution, and this mode of operation
```

    should only be used in exceptional cases. We also can't provide
    any support for problems arising from such a use of NEST Server.

.. _nest_server_advanced:

Advanced topics
---------------

> Executing scripts in NEST Server using `curl`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run scripts in NEST Server using `curl`
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As shown above, you can send custom simulation code to
``localhost:5000/exec``. On the command line, this approach might be a
bit more challenging in case your script does not fit on a single

> line. For such situation, we recommend using a JSON file as inut for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
line. For such situations, we recommend using a JSON file as input for
```

``curl``:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "source": "import nest\n# Reset kernel\nnest.ResetKernel()\n# Create nodes\nparams = {'rate': 6500.}\npg = nest.Create('poisson_generator', 1, params)\nneurons = nest.Create('iaf_psc_alpha', 1000)\nsr = nest.Create('spike_recorder')\n# Connect nodes\nnest.Connect(pg, neurons, syn_spec={'weight': 10.})\nnest.Connect(neurons[::10], sr)\n# Simulate\nnest.Simulate(1000.0)\n# Get events\nn_events = nest.GetStatus(sr, 'n_events')[0]\nprint('Number of events:', n_events)\n",
      "return": "n_events"
    }

If we assume that the above JSON object is stored in a file called
``simulation_script.json``, you can execute it using the follwing
command:

.. code-block:: sh

    curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d @simulation_script.json http://localhost:5000/exec

> Interacting with NEST Server using JavaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interact with NEST Server using JavaScript
```

The third type of request we might want to make is sending a custom
Python script to NEST Server. As outlined above, this is supported by
the `exec` route. to make use of that, we define a function with
callback for POST requests to execute a script:

.. code-block:: JavaScript

    function execScript(source, returnData="data", callback=console.log) {
        const data = {"source": source, "return": returnData};
        const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();
        xhr.addEventListener("readystatechange", () => {
            if (xhr.readyState === 4) {  // request done
                callback(xhr.responseText);
            }
        });
        // send to exec route of NEST Server
        xhr.open("POST", "http://localhost:5000/exec");
        xhr.setRequestHeader('Access-Control-Allow-Headers', 'Content-Type');
        xhr.setRequestHeader('Content-Type', 'application/json');
        xhr.send(JSON.stringify(data));  // serialize data
    }

Now, we can send a custom Python script to NEST Server:

.. code-block:: JavaScript

    // default values of iaf_psc_alpha
    execScript("data = nest.GetDefaults('iaf_psc_alpha')");

.. note::

>     An full HTML client for NEST Server based on the ideas outlined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A full HTML client for NEST Server based on the ideas outlined
```

    above is available in the `nest-jsclient repository
    <https://github.com/steffengraber/nest-jsclient>`_ on the GitHub
    account of Steffen Graber.

> Controlling NEST from Bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Control NEST from Bash
```
I'm also not a fan of the word control here. I also don't know what this implies.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For POST requests to the NEST API Server, we recommend to use a Bash function:

.. code-block:: sh

    #!/bin/bash
    NEST_API=localhost:5000/api

    nest-server-api() {
        if [ $# -eq 2 ]
        then
            curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "$2" $NEST_API/$1
        else
            curl $NEST_API/$1
        fi
    }

> Now, we can send API requests to NEST Server using function ``nest-server-api`` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we can send API requests to NEST Server using the ``nest-server-api`` function:
```

The easiest way to interact with the NEST Server is the `NEST Server
Client` provided in ``examples/NESTServerClient`` in the source
distribution of NEST. It can be either used directly by simply staring

> a Python session in that directory, or installed by running ``python3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a Python session in that directory or installing it by running ``python3
```

setup.py install`` therein. NEST itself does not have to be installed

> in ordert to use the NEST Server Client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in order to use the NEST Server Client.
```
